---
ID: 261
post_title: 'Classic – Step 4: Installing power distribution board'
author: impeccableaslan
post_date: 2017-06-17 09:58:18
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: >
  http://rcnode.com/index.php/classic-step-4-installing-power-distribution-board/
published: true
---
[et_pb_section fb_built="1" admin_label="section" _builder_version="3.0.51" background_color_gradient_direction="270deg"][et_pb_row custom_padding="24.3125px|0px|0px|0px" background_color_2="#000000" admin_label="row" _builder_version="3.0.51" background_size="initial" background_position="top_left" background_repeat="repeat"][et_pb_column type="2_3" _builder_version="3.0.47" parallax="off" parallax_method="on"][et_pb_divider color="#000000" show_divider="on" divider_weight="4px" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_divider][et_pb_text admin_label="Text" _builder_version="3.0.51" background_size="initial" background_position="top_left" background_repeat="repeat" inline_fonts="Cantata One"]<p class=""><span style="font-family: 'Cantata One';"><span style="font-size: 32px;">Step 4: Installing power </span></span></p>
<p class=""><span style="font-family: 'Cantata One';"><span style="font-size: 32px;">distribution board</span></span></p>[/et_pb_text][et_pb_video src="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0H0DA0-SQCk&feature=youtu.be" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_video][et_pb_text _builder_version="3.0.51"]<p>First look at how the power distribution board is positioned and how I made it stay in place. Pause through the video if needed. Essentially, what I did was to position the power distribution like a rhombus and drill it into place. Also, a key thing to note is how the red and black connectors are positioned. They determine how the ESCs would connect to the power distribution board and MUST be positioned as shown. So:</p>
<p>1. Position the power distribution board like a rhombus and as such:</p>[/et_pb_text][et_pb_image src="http://rcnode.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/06/powerboard.png" animation="off" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_image][et_pb_text _builder_version="3.0.51"]<p>where the battery wires (The thick red and black wires) are positioned at the side closest to the back of Hercules frame. Also, make sure that the small red and black connectors are positioned as shown.</p>
<p>2. The next step involves screwing the power distribution board into place. This will done by two holes on the edges of power distribution board: The right and left holes where the "right hole" is the hole facing you with an inserted screw on the picture above. So "left hole" will the one opposite of "right hole".</p>
<p>3. Find a screw that would fit through the hole of the power distribution board. Note that there is also holes beneath the "right and left holes". Essentially, you want a screw that would go through the right hole and the hole underneath. The same applies for the left hole.</p>
<p>4. As you can see in the picture above, I have chosen an insanely long screw. Too long in fact as I had to drill some space beneath to accommodate the screw. So remember to choose a suitable screw and if you run into any problems, make use of your drill.</p>
<p class="">5. With the screws in place, screw the nuts so that the screw and the nuts will hold the power distribution board to the frame. Use two nuts on one screw to make sure that it is held in place.</p>
<p class="">6. Do a final check and refer back to the video to see if everything is in place.</p>[/et_pb_text][et_pb_divider color="#000000" show_divider="on" divider_weight="4px" admin_label="Divider" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_divider][et_pb_post_nav in_same_term="on" prev_text="Step 3: Build the frame" next_text="Step 5: Connect the ESCs to the PDB" admin_label="Post Navigation" _builder_version="3.0.51" title_font="Cantata One|on|||" title_font_size="15px" title_text_color="#3ad10c" use_border_color="on" border_color="#000000" border_width="0px" border_style="inset"][/et_pb_post_nav][et_pb_divider color="#000000" show_divider="on" divider_weight="4px" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_divider][et_pb_post_nav in_same_term="on" taxonomy_name="Step 2: Soldering" admin_label="Post Navigation" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_post_nav][/et_pb_column][et_pb_column type="1_3" _builder_version="3.0.47" background_color="#000000" parallax="off" parallax_method="on"][et_pb_sidebar area="sidebar-2" admin_label="Sidebar" _builder_version="3.0.51" header_font="Cantata One|on|||on" header_font_size="25px" header_text_color="#ffffff" body_font="|on|||" body_font_size="17px" body_text_color="#0c71c3"][/et_pb_sidebar][/et_pb_column][/et_pb_row][et_pb_row custom_padding="24.3125px|0px|3px|0px" admin_label="row" _builder_version="3.0.51"][et_pb_column type="4_4" _builder_version="3.0.47" parallax="off" parallax_method="on"][et_pb_comments admin_label="Comments" _builder_version="3.0.51"][/et_pb_comments][/et_pb_column][/et_pb_row][/et_pb_section]