---
ID: 342
post_title: Definitions
author: impeccableaslan
post_date: 2017-06-18 13:01:44
post_excerpt: ""
layout: page
permalink: http://rcnode.com/index.php/definitions/
published: true
---
[et_pb_section fb_built="1" admin_label="section" _builder_version="3.0.47"][et_pb_row admin_label="row" _builder_version="3.0.47" background_size="initial" background_position="top_left" background_repeat="repeat"][et_pb_column type="4_4" _builder_version="3.0.47" parallax="off" parallax_method="on"][et_pb_text admin_label="Text" _builder_version="3.0.47" background_size="initial" background_position="top_left" background_repeat="repeat"]<p class=""><span style="font-size: xx-large;"><span>Definitions</span></span></p>
<p class=""><span style="font-size: medium;">This section comprises of definitions commonly seen in a drone library.</span></p>[/et_pb_text][et_pb_accordion _builder_version="3.0.51" use_border_color="on" border_color="#000000" open_toggle_text_color="#0c71c3" closed_toggle_text_color="#0c71c3"][et_pb_accordion_item title="int32_t, int16_t, int8_t, uint8_t, uint16_t, uin32_t" icon_color="#0c71c3" _builder_version="3.0.51" open="on" open_toggle_text_color="#0c71c3" closed_toggle_text_color="#0c71c3"]<p>The definition c++ has for its basic integer data types: char, short, int, long, and <g class="gr_ gr_5 gr-alert gr_spell gr_inline_cards gr_run_anim ContextualSpelling only-del replaceWithoutSep" id="5" data-gr-id="5">long long</g> are very loosely defined. It merely guarantees that the types can represent some range of values, but different platforms have <g class="gr_ gr_6 gr-alert gr_gramm gr_inline_cards gr_run_anim Grammar only-ins doubleReplace replaceWithoutSep" id="6" data-gr-id="6">different</g> way of interpreting the particular type.</p>
<p>An example of this is long. On one platform, it might be 32 bits (the minimum required by C). On another platform, it might be 64 bits. So, should we want an integer type that's precisely 32 bits long, we use int32_t. int32_t is an alias for whatever integer type your particular platform has that is exactly 32 bits. The same goes for uint32_t, but for unsigned <g class="gr_ gr_15 gr-alert gr_spell gr_inline_cards gr_run_anim ContextualSpelling multiReplace" id="15" data-gr-id="15">32 bit</g> values. Therefore, on one particular platform, that might be an unsigned int and on another platform, that might be an unsigned long.</p>
<p>The same goes for int16_t, int8_t, etc. This does not only apply to int32_t.</p>[/et_pb_accordion_item][et_pb_accordion_item title="Static" _builder_version="3.0.51" icon_color="#0c71c3" open_toggle_text_color="#0c71c3" closed_toggle_text_color="#0c71c3"]<p>Static is a keyword used within a class.</p>
<p>If a member inside a class is defined using the keyword "Static", then no matter how many objects of the class is created, there will only be one copy of the static member. So should you change the value of one of the copies, all other copies will be affected as there is technically no other copies and is in actuality the same thing.</p>
<p>If a static is used to define a function inside a class, then it is made independent of the class. So it can be called even if no objects of the class exists and can only be called through the class name and "::"-scope resolution operator.</p>[/et_pb_accordion_item][/et_pb_accordion][/et_pb_column][/et_pb_row][/et_pb_section]